Search on Wikisource
Photograph your local culture, help Wikipedia and win!
Hide
On the shortness of life
Use another language
Download PDF
preserve
Review
This is the stable version, checked on February 5, 2021. 24 pending changes await review.

 EPUB   MOBI   PDF   RTF   TXT
Lucius Annaeus Seneca
On the Shortness of Life
To Paulinus
c. 49 AD

edition: L. Annaeus Seneca, On the Shortness of Life, in Moral Essays: volume 2, London and New York, Heinemann, 1932; John W. Basore edited
source: Corpus Corporum
Index
I.
Review

[1] The greater part of mortals, Pauline, conquers regarding the nature of malice, because we are born in a small age, which this time, so quickly, so rapidly, that is given to us, runs so that, except for very few, it deprives life of its equipment in life itself. And not only this public, as they think, has been troubled by the crowd and reckless [1] people; the feelings of famous men have also evoked complaints here. Hence that exclamation of the greatest doctors is: 'life is short, a long art'; [2] hence Aristotle’s wisdom, inconvenient to a wise man regarding nature, saying: 'it has indulged animals only for a few or ten centuries, so that they might educate them as a quail or a dog'; [3] We do not have a small time, but we lose much. A sufficient long life and a large amount of time is given for the consummation of great things, if it were entirely well-placed; but where it is dissipated by luxury and neglect, where no good is spent, we finally understand that we cannot help but pass over it by necessity. [4] Thus it is: we do not take a short life, but we make it so, we are not impoverished in it but prodigal. As broad and royal riches, where they have reached a bad lord, are dissipated in a moment, yet however modest, if they are entrusted to the good, they grow with use.

[1] What do we complain about the nature of things? It has treated them benignly; life is long, if you know how to use it. But [2] some it holds insatiable avarice, others industrious diligence in idle labors; some intoxicate themselves with wine, others are stupefied by inertia; some are exhausted by the perpetual ambition suspended from the judgments of others, some are led by a greedy desire for all lands, all seas, by the hope of profit; some are tormented by the cupidity of war, either by foreign dangers or by anxious concerns about their own; there are some whom voluntary servitude, cultivated by the esteem of superiors, consumes; [2] many are detained either by the desire for foreign fortune or by their own complaints[3]; most are driven by a wandering and inconsistent lightness, pleasing to nothing, by new undertakings; some find nothing to direct their course, but they seek the fortunes of merchants and fortune-tellers, so that it is not doubted that it is true, as said by the greatest of poets: "A small part of life is that in which we live.” Furthermore, indeed, all space is not life but time. [3] Urgent and circumstances vices from all sides, and do not allow them to rise again or to raise their eyes to the true; but they press them down and fix them in greed; they can never recur to themselves; if when some chance respite occurs, it is like a deep sea, in which after the wind there is also fluctuation, they fluctuate and never find rest from their own desires. [4] About these do you think I am saying, whose faults are confessed? Look at them, to whom happiness is attributed; they are extinguished by their own good things. How heavy are riches to so many! How much does the eloquence and daily ostentation of many ingenious minds drain the blood! How many are pained by endless pleasures! How much do they leave surrounded by the people of clients, without children! Finally, all these are perverted from the lowest to the highest; here is an advocate, here is one who is present, there is one who is endangered, there defends, there judges, no one vindicates himself, one consumes another. Question about these, whose names are listed, you will see by knowing them the marks: this is his teacher, that is his; no one is his own. [5] Then the madness of some is the greatest indignation: they complain about the annoyance of superiors, because they have not been free to approach them who wish to approach them! Does anyone dare to question the pride of another, who never vacates himself? Nevertheless, he, whoever you are, looks at you with an insolent face but sometimes considers your words, he listens to his ears with your words, he receives you at his side; you have not ever looked at yourself, you have not been worthy to hear. It is not that the duties you impute to others, because when you did those things, you did not want to do them with another, but you could not be with yourself.

recensere

[1] All things agree, which ever ingenious minds have flourished, in this one thing will assent, that they will never be amazed at the darkness of human minds. They suffer their own possessions to be occupied by no one, and if a small matter is desired concerning the limits, they run to stones and weapons; they allow themselves to go into their own lives, indeed they even lead others to become its possessors. No one is found who wishes to divide his money; each man distributes as many to another! They are bound in restraining their property, and at the same time it comes to the time to cast out time, most wasteful in it, whose one honest avarice is. Let one therefore be understood from the elders: [2] “We see you have arrived at the end of human life, a hundredth to you or above the year has surpassed; aged, recall to the computation of your age. Lead, as much as you are indebted to this time, as much as a friend, as much as a king, as much as a client you abstain from, as much as the coercion of servants, as much as the busygoing through the city; add to it the diseases which we have made with our hand, add to it what has been without use; you will see that you have fewer years than you count. [3] Repeat to yourself memory, when you are sure of counsel, how many days each has run as you had destined, when your uses have been, when your face is in its state, when your mind is intrepid, what you have done in such a long age, though many have torn your life away without your perceiving what you have lost, how vain is the pain, how foolish is the joy, how greedy is the desire, how gentle is the conversation has abstained, how small is left to you of your own thing; you understand yourself to be immature to die. [4] As if you always live being fed, your fragility never comes to you, you do not observe how much time has passed; as if you have lost from full and abundant, he perhaps in the meantime is that very one who is given to someone [6] either a man or a thing a last day. You desire all things. You will hear many saying: “From the fiftieth year I will withdraw myself into leisure, from the sixtieth year I will abandon my duties.” And who do you take who has the longest life to receive? Who endures that she suffers as you dispose of it? Is it not shameful for you to keep the remains of your life to yourself and to assign that only time to a good mind, which can be conferred to no thing? How much is it to begin to live, it is to cease! What is so foolish a mortality to delay wise counsel and then to wish to begin life in that place where few have lost!

review

[1] You will see voices of men descending, with the most powerful and those beneath, seeking leisure, praising all their good things above them. They wish, if it is safe, to descend from that fast of theirs; for nothing should escape or happen to them, so that fortune rushes into herself.
[2] The divine Augustus, to whom the gods have performed more than any other, does not lack peace to pray and to seek a vacation from the public affairs; all his speech was always turned to this, so that he might hope for leisure. This he pacified his labors, even if they were sweet, with consolation, sometimes believing himself to be victorious.
[3] In some letter sent to the senate, in which he was not to consider his leisure to be empty, nor to have promised that it did not differ from his previous glory, he found these words: “But these things happen more splendidly than they can promise. Yet, at the same time, the desire for time, the most desired of all, has come to me, so that since it is still occupied with the joy of things, I might command it to produce something of pleasure from the sweetness of words.”
[4] Such was the thing of leisure, that it, because it could not be used by custom, it presupposed it by thought. He depended on all things from one thing. He gave fortune to men and peoples, he thought the happiest day, when he had removed his greatness. He was experienced, how much those good things expressed by the sweat of all lands, how much they concealed the hidden concerns.
[5] When the citizens were first, then him with the colleges, then lastly with friends, he was forced to arm himself with ships and land, to spill blood into the sea and land. He turned the Roman armies, weary from war, around all the nearby coasts, to external wars; while the Alps were pacified, he subdued the middle peace and the enemies through the empire, while he moved his limits beyond the Rhine and Euphrates and Danube, in the very city of Murena, Caepius, Lepidus, Egnatius, and others were sharpening their arrows against him. He did not escape their intrigues: his daughter and many noble young men were seduced as if by a sacrament, and Paulus and again the feared him with Antony, the woman. These wounds had cut them from their own members; others were born again; as if a grave were wounded with much blood, the body was always partly torn.
[6] Therefore he sought leisure, and his labors resided in this hope and thought, this was his wish, who was able to fulfill the wishes of those who were bound by wishes.

V.
recensere
[1] M. Cicero among Catilines, Clodius thrown and Pompeius and Crassus, partly manifest enemies, partly dubious friends, while he fluctuates with the state, and holds it going down to ruin, and newly abducted, and not quiet about the things of the second, nor enduring the things of the hostile, whenever he is hated, consul of his own, without cause, but without end! [2] Such mournful voices does he express in some letter to Atticus, now having defeated his father Pompey, still encouraging the weapons broken in Spain to his son! “What shall I do,” he said, “here, do you ask? I linger in my Tusculan home, half-free.” Else he adds afterwards, with which he fills the former age, and inquires about the present, and despairing about the future. “Half-free” he said Cicero. [3] But Hercules never will a wise man proceed to such a humble name, never will he be half-free, always of complete liberty and solid, released and of his own law, and higher than the others. What can be above him, who is above fortune?

VI.
recensere

[1] Livius Drusus, a man harsh and vehement, having moved bad Gracchi laws and gathered a great assembly of all Italy, not seeing the outcome of things, neither was he permitted to act nor was he free to abandon once begun discussions, he was reviled for saying that he had made his life restless from the beginning, that he had never even been able to take holidays for a boy. He dared, still a boy and still a student, to accuse the judges of being biased and to interpose his favor in the forum so effectively, that some judgments are known to have been taken from him. [2] What led him to such immature ambition? You knew that he had committed a great and private and public wrongdoing. He was therefore constantly questioned about whether he had ever been able to take holidays for a boy, seditious and grave in the forum. It is disputed whether he himself handed the matter to his own hands; suddenly, having fallen with a wound accepted through the groin, someone doubted whether his death was voluntary, whether it was sudden, or whether it was opportune. [3] It is useless to remember many who seemed to him happiest of all, who themselves had declared a true testimony of all their actions over the years; but with these complaints they did not change others nor themselves. For his words burst forth, and they return to custom. [4] Your Hercules life, though it has gone by a thousand years, is set against the most skillful against it; these vices will not consume any age. This, however, is the space that, though nature runs, reason expands, quickly must flee necessity for you; for you do not grasp, nor retain, nor make the delay of all things swift, but you abandon it as something superfluous and repairable.

[1] Firstly, those who are occupied with nothing but wine and lust; for none are more shameful in their occupation. The rest, even if they are held captive by the image of vain glory, err in a showy manner; though I consider them greedy, or those who indulge in wrath or hate, or engage in unjust wars; all these are guilty in their deeds, and their wickedness is to cast themselves into the belly with lust.
[2] All of these men spend their times, observe how long they count, how long they deceive, how long they fear, how long they worship, how long they are worshipped, how much they occupy themselves with false reputations and with banquets, which are already established customs: you will see how they prevent themselves from breathing, whether from their own evils or their own goods.
[3] Finally, among all things, it is not possible for a man occupied with things, to properly exercise eloquence, or liberal disciplines, when the mind is distracted, and receives nothing higher, but merely swallows everything as if it were ingrained. The least thing a man occupied with things is to live; it is a knowledge more difficult than any. Teachers are numerous for other arts, and some of these boys have been seen to understand them so much, that they could even command them. To live is to learn the whole of life, and, what may be more surprising to you, to learn the whole of life is to die.
[4] All the greatest men, having abandoned all impediments, would declare that they had devoted the whole of their time to wealth, possessions, and pleasures, and they have done this until the very end of their lives, so that they know how to live; yet many of these have not yet realized themselves, let alone those who know that they have passed away.
[5] Great men, thousands, and above human errors, a man is not permitted to delay doing anything from his own time, and therefore his life is the longest, because as much as he has fulfilled, he has emptied himself entirely of it. He did not lie idle anything uncultivated or idle, he was not under anyone, he did not find anything worthy of being exchanged with his own time, the custodian of which is so frugal. Therefore, it was enough for him; but as for those whose life has taken much from the people,
[6] It is not that you will never understand their harm. Certainly, you will hear from those who have great happiness, among the crowds of clients or lawsuits, or other honest miseries, exclaiming sometimes: "I am not allowed to live."
[7] But is it not allowed? All those who advocate for you, lead you astray. How many days has that accused man abstained? How many candidates has he? How many old women have been impatient to hand over their inheritances? How many men have been feigned to be eager for the avarice of those who entice? How many stronger friends, who do not have you for friendship, but for an apparatus? Disperse, I say, and examine the days of your life; you will see that only a few, and fat ones, have settled among you.
[8] He pursues those whom he has desired, and then says: "When will this year pass?" He makes the games, the fate of which he chose to consider great, he says: "When will I escape these?" He tears up his patron throughout the forum and with great concurrence completes all beyond what can be heard: "When," he says, "will the matters be decided?" Everyone hastens their life and labors for the future, with the boredom of the present.
[9] But he who confers no time on anything, who orders every day as if it were the last, and does not desire tomorrow nor fears it. What is it that a new pleasure can offer at any hour? All things are noted, all things are perceived to satiety. Besides, fortune, as it pleases, arranges things; life is already safe. It can be added to, subtracted from, and added as if one were already full of food, which does not desire nor does it take it.
[10] It is not that you would think that someone does not live long because of wrinkles or old age; that man did not live long, but he was long. What if you think that he has sailed much, that the savage storm has taken him from port here and there, and that the winds of different furious ones have carried him around in a circle,

VIII.
recensere

1. I often wonder, I see him, some seeking time from him and those who are asked, finding him easy. Both of them desire this, because of which they seek time, but neither of them receives it; as if nothing is desired, as if nothing is given. The most precious thing of all is played with; yet they deceive them, because it is an incorporeal thing, because it does not come before the eyes, therefore it is considered the vilest, almost no price is attributed to it.
2. Yearly, sociable men most willingly receive them and give to them labor or work or their diligence. No one estimates time; they use it more loosely as if it were free. But see those same sick men, if the danger of death is closer, touching the knees of physicians, if they fear a capital punishment, they prepare all their things to hang themselves in order to live!
3. Such discord of passions is in them. If it were possible to propose how many years of each person’s life have passed, then concerning the future, how those who have seen few would be afraid, how they would show mercy! However, it is easy to dispense with what is certain; that which you do not know when it will fail, you must preserve it more diligently.
4. Yet it is not what you think them ignorant of, how dear a thing it is; they often say to those whom they love very dearly that they are prepared to give a part of their years. They give and do not understand; they give it in such a way that they subtract an increase to themselves. But they do not know of this, whether they subtract [11]; therefore it is tolerable for them to suffer damage from a hidden loss.
5. No one will restore years, no one will again give you back your time. It will go, as it began, and neither will it recall its course nor suppress it. Nothing will be disturbed, nothing will hasten the speed of its own. It should quietly lie down; it does not rule with the power of the king, it does not offer its favor to the people for a longer time. As it was sent from the first day, it should run; it should not deviate anywhere, it should not hesitate. What will happen? You are occupied, life is hurrying; death will be present meanwhile, whether you want it or not, it must be relieved.

review

1 Surely nothing is more foolish than the senses of some, I say of those who pursue wisdom? They are more occupied, so that they may live better; they spend their lives instructing themselves! They order their thoughts for the long term; the greatest extension of life is taken; it first extracts from each man the day, it seizes the present, while the next promises. The greatest impediment to living is expectation, which hangs upon the morrow, loses the present. What is placed in the hand of fortune, you control, what is in your own, you relinquish. Where do you look? Where do you extend yourself? All that is future lies in the uncertain; hasten to live! 2 Behold, the greatest poet cries out and, as if with a divine voice, sings a hymn: The best days flee from the miserable mortals of the age. “Why do you delay?” he says, “Why do you cease? Unless you occupy yourself, it flees.” And if you occupy him, it will nevertheless flee; therefore, with the speed of using time, one must strive to be quick, and be grasped as quickly as from a rapid torrent, not always flowing slowly. 3 This also, most beautifully, is intended to dispel endless procrastination, which does not say the best or greatest age, but the day. Do you extend months and years, as you have seen, into a long series, for the sake of your own greed, without any haste? It speaks to you about the day and about this very one fleeing. 4 Is there then doubt that the best day flees from the miserable mortals, that is, the occupied? Whose youthful spirits are yet oppressed by old age, to whom the unskilled and helpless arrive, for nothing is provided; they suddenly fall into it, not feeling to access it every day. 5 Just as speech, reading, or any more intense thought, makes a journey that makes one think that one has arrived before approaching it, so does this journey of life, which is the most urgent and immediate, which we make with vigilant and sleeping people, does not appear unless at the end.

to review

1. What I proposed if I wished to divide it into parts and to lead the arguments, many things would occur to me, by means of which I would prove the shortest life of the occupied. Fabianus used to say, not from those philosophers of the cathedral, but from the true and ancient: 'against passions driven by impulse, one must not fight by subtlety, nor incur the ranks with small wounds, but avert the encounter; it is not a matter of proving a delicate thing, for it must be contorted, not embellished.' Nevertheless, since an error was attributed to them as their own, the teaching of them are not only to be lamented.
2. Life is divided into three times: that which has been, that which is, that which is to come. Of those, what we do is brief, what we are to do is doubtful, what we have done is certain. This is because, in that to which fortune has lost its right, that which is not able to be reduced to the judgment of anyone. Occupied men lack this; for they have no leisure to look back at the past, and if they have, it is unjust to remember the thing to be regretted.
3. Therefore, unexpected to the times that are poorly exact, the mind is provoked and does not dare to tempt them, whose vices, even those which had been stolen by the present pleasure, are cured by withdrawing them. No one, unless he has under his censure all that has been done, which never deceives, willingly turns himself to the past;
4. He who has pursued many ambitions, has despised them proudly, has been impotently victorious, has deceitfully deceived, has greedily seized, has poured out his excess, it is necessary for him to fear his memory. However, this is a part of our time, sacred and dedicated, all human cases overcome, beyond the realm of fortune, which is not agitated by lack, by fear, by incursions of sickness; this cannot be disturbed or broken. Its possession is perpetual and fearless. Individuals are only present days, and those are by moments; but all the times of the past, when you command them, are present, to be inspected and restrained by your judgment.
5. Secure and quiet of mind, it runs through all parts of life; the minds of the occupied, as if under a yoke, cannot bend themselves or look back. Therefore, the life of them goes into the deep; and as nothing profits if it does not receive and serve what is absent, so nothing matters how much time is given, if there is nowhere to rest, the soul is transmitted through torn and perforated minds.
6. The present time is the shortest, so much indeed that it seems to none; for in its course it is always flowing and commanding; it desists from being before it comes, and it does not tolerate more delay than the world or the stars, whose restless agitation never remains in the same track. Therefore, only to the occupied belongs the present time, which is so short that it cannot be seized, and it is this very thing that distracts them into many things.

XI.
Finally, does one wish to know how long a person will live? See how much they desire to live long. In old age, the few seek an addition of years with their wishes; the young pretend to be themselves; they deceive themselves with lies and are as willingly deceived by fate as if they were to deceive one fate alone. Now, however, when some foolishness of mortality has admonished them, they fear to die not so much because they are leaving life, but because they are being extracted from it. They cry out that they are foolish, who have not lived, and if only they have escaped from that health, they will be victorious in leisure; then how uselessly they will have labored, when all has fallen into nothing. But those for whom life is far from all business, what is it that is spacious? Nothing is taken from that, nothing is scattered to others and others, nothing is handed over by fortune, nothing is killed by neglect, nothing is deducted by generosity, nothing is superfluous; all, as it were, is in return. Whatever it may be, it is abundant and sufficient, and therefore, when the last day comes, the wise man will not hesitate to go to death with a certain step.

XII.
recensere

1 Quaeris fortasse, quos occupatos vocem? Non est quod me solos putes dicere, quos a basilica immissi demum canes eiciunt, quos aut in sua vides turba speciosius elidi aut in aliena contemptius, quos officia domibus suis e vocant, ut alienis foribus inlidant, aut[16] hasta praetoris infami lucro et quandoque suppuraturo exercet.
2 In villa aut in lecto suo, in media solitudine, quamvis ab omnibus recesserint, sibi ipsi molesti sunt; quorum non otiosa vita dicenda, est, sed desidiosa occupatio.
3 Illum tu otiosum vocas qui Corinthia, paucorum furore pretiosa, anxia suptilitate concinnat et maiorem dierum partem in aeruginosis lamellis consumit? Qui in ceromate (nam, pro facinus! ne Romanis quidem vitiis laboramus) spectator puerorum rrixantium sedet? Qui iumentorum suorum greges in aetatium et colorum paria diducit? Qui athletas novissimos[17] pascit?
4 Quid? illos otiosos vocas, quibus apud tonsorem multae horae transmittuntur, dum decerpitur, si quid proxima nocte subcrevit, dum de singulis capillis in consilium itur, dum aut disiecta coma restituitur aut deficiens hinc atque illinc in frontem compellitur?
5 Quomodo irascuntur, si tonsor paulo neglegentior fuit, tamquam virum tonderet! Quomodo excandescunt, si quid ex iuba sua decisum est, si quid extra ordinem iacuit, nisi omnia in anulos suos reciderunt!
6 Quis est istorum qui non malit rem publicam turbari quam capam suam[18]? Qui non sollicitior sit de capitis sui decore quam de salute? Qui non comptior esse malit quam honestior?
7 Hos tu otiosos vocas inter pectinem speculumque occupatos?
8 Quid illi, qui in componendis, audiendis, discendis canticis operati sunt, dum vocem, cuius rectum cursum natura et optimum et simplicissimum fecit, in flexus modulationis inertissimae torquent, quorum digiti aliquod intra se carmen metientes semper sonant, quorum, cum ad res serias, etiam saepe tristes adhibiti sunt, exauditur tacita modulatio?
9 Non habent isti otium, sed iners negotium.
10 Convivia me hercules horum non posuerim inter vacantia tempora, cum videam, quam solliciti argentum ordinent, quam diligenter exoletorum suorum tunicas succingant, quam suspensi sint, quomodo aper a coeo exeat, qua celeritate signo dato glabri ad ministeria discurrant, quanta arte scindantur aves in frusta non enormia, quam curiose infelices pueruli ebriorum sputa detergeant.
11 Ex his elegantiae lautitiaeque fama captatur et usque eo in omnes vitae secessus mala sua illos secuntur,ut nec bibant sine ambitione nec edant.
12 Ne illos quidem inter otiosos numeraverim,qui sella se et lectica huc et illuc ferunt et ad gestationum suarum, quasi deserere illas non liceat, horas occurrunt, quos quando lavari debeant, quando natare, quando cenare, alius admonet; usque[19] eo nimio delicati animi languore solvuntur, ut per se scire non possint, an esuriant!
13 Audio quendam ex delicatis — si modo deliciae vocandae sunt vitam et consuetudinem humanam dediscere — , cum ex balneo inter manus elatus et in sella positus esset, dixisse interrogando: " Iam sedeo? "
14 Hunc tu ignorantem, an sedeat, putas scire an vivat, an videat, an otiosus sit? Non facile dixerim, utrum magis miserear, si hoc ignoravit, an si ignorare se finxit.
15 Multarum quidem rerum oblivionem sentiunt, sed multarum et imitantur. Quaedam vitia illos quasi felicitatis argumenta delectant; nimis humilis et contempti hominis videtur scire quid facias.
16 I nunc et mimos multa mentiri ad exprobrandam luxuriam puta. Plura me hercules praetereunt quam fingunt et tanta incredibilium vitiorum copia ingenioso in hoc unum saeculo processit, ut iam mimorum arguere possimus neglegentiam.
17 Esse aliquem, qui usque eo deliciis interierit ut an sedeat alteri credat!
18 Non est ergo hic otiosus, aliud illi nomen imponas; aeger est, immo mortuus est; ille otiosus est, cui otii sui et sensus est.
19 Hic vero semivivus, cui ad intellegendos corporis sui habitus indice opus est, quomodo potest hic ullius temporis dominus esse?

XIII.
review

1 Persequi singulos longum est, quorum aut latrunculi aut pila aut excoquendi in sole corporis cura consumpsere vitam. Non sunt otiosi, quorum voluptates multum negotii habent. Nam de illis nemo dubitabit, quin operose nihil agant, qui litterarum inutilium studiis detinentur, quae iam apud Romanos quoque magna manus est.
2 Graecorum iste morbus fuit quaerere, quem numerum Ulixes remigum habuisset, prior scripta esset Ilias an Odyssia, praeterea an eiusdem essent auctoris, alia deinceps huius notae, quae sive contineas, nihil tacitam conscientiam iuvant sive proferas, non doctior videaris sed molestior.
3 Ecce Romanos quoque invasit inane studium supervacua discendi. His diebus audii quendam referentem, quae primus quisque ex Romanis ducibus fecisset; primus navali proelio Duilius vicit, primus Curius Dentatus in triumpho duxit elephantos. Etiamnunc ista, etsi ad veram gloriam non tendunt, circa civilium tamen operum exempla versantur; non est profutura talis scientia, est tamen quae nos speciosa rerum vanitate detineat.
4 Hoc quoque quaerentibus remittamus, quis Romanis primus persuaserit navem conscendere. Claudius is fuit, Caudex ob hoc ipsum appellatus, quia plurium tabularum contextus caudex apud antiquos vocatur, unde publicae tabulae codices dicuntur et naves nunc quoque ex antiqua consuetudine, quae commeatus per Tiberim subvehunt, codicariae vocantur.
5 Sane et hoc ad rem pertineat, quod Valerius Corvinus primus Messanam vicit et primus ex familia Valeriorum urbis captae in se translato nomine Messana appellatus est paulatimque vulgo permutante litteras Messala dictus.
6 Num et hoc cuiquam curare permittes, quod primus L. Sulla in circo leones solutos dedit, cum alioquin alligati darentur, ad conficiendos eos missis a rege Boccho iaculatoribus? Et hoc sane remittatur: num et Pompeium primum in circo elephantorum duodeviginti pugnam edidisse commissis more proeli noxiis[21] hominibus ad ullam rem bonam pertinet? Princeps civitatis et inter antiquos principes, ut fama tradidit, bonitatis eximiae memorabile putavit spectaculi genus novo more perdere homines. Depugnant? Parum est. Laneinantur? Parum est: ingenti mole animalium exterantur!
7 Satius erat ista in oblivionem ire, ne quis postea potens disceret invideretque rei minime humanae. O quantum caliginis mentibus nostris obicit magna felicitas! Ille se supra rerum naturam esse tune credidit, cum tot miserorum hominum catervas sub alio caelo natis beluis Obiceret, cum bellum inter tam disparia animalia committeret, eum in conspectum populi Romani multum sanguinis funderet mox plus ipsum fundere coacturus. At idem postea Alexandrina perfidia deceptus ultimo mancipio transfodiendum se praebuit, tum demum intellecta inani iactatione cognominis sui.
8 Sed ut illo revertar, unde decessi, et in eadem materia ostendam supervacuam quorumdam diligentiam: idem narrabat Metellum victis in Sicilia Poenis triumphantem unum omnium Romanorum ante currum centum et viginti captivos elephantos duxisse; Sullam ultimum Romanorum protulisse pomerium, quod numquam provinciali, sed Italico agro adquisito proferre moris apud antiquos fuit. Hoc scire magis prodest, quam Aventinum montem extra pomerium esse, ut ille adfirmabat, propter alteram ex duabus causis, aut quod plebs eo secessisset, aut quod Remo auspicante illo loco aves non addixissent, alia deinceps innumerabilia, quae aut farta[22] sunt mendaciis aut similia?
9 Nam ut concedas omnia eos fide bona dicere, ut ad praestationem scribant, tamen cuius ista errores minuent? Cuius cupiditates prement? Quem fortiorem, quem iustiorem, quem liberaliorem facient? Dubitare se interim Fabianus noster aiebat, an satius esset nullis studiis admoveri quam his implicari.

Review.

1. The lazy ones among all are those who lack wisdom, and they live only; for they do not properly protect their own lifetime alone. They add to each age its own; whatever has been done by years before them, they acquire it. Unless we are most ungrateful, those were born to us who founded the most sacred opinions, who prepared life for us. We are led from darkness to light by foreign labor for the most beautiful things; no age is forbidden to us, we are admitted into all things, and if it pleases us, with the narrowness of the human mind, to be distressed by the spaces we occupy, there is much time, through which we are emptied.
2. It is permissible to argue with Socrates, to doubt him Carneades, to rest with Epicurus, to conquer man by nature with the Stoics, to exceed the Cynics. Since nature itself is patient that all ages may accompany it in consortium, why are we, from this fleeting and fragile passage of time, to those things immense, eternal, which are common with the better, with such a mind, such a spirit?
3. Those who speak of matters with the gods, who disturb others, when they have well lived, they walk daily through all the thresholds, they pass through all open doors, they greet with salutation all those who have traveled through diverse houses, seeing with their eyes the multitude of desires that can be seen in this city, so immense and varied?
4. How many are there whose sleep, or luxury, or inhumanity moves them! How many who, long staring at them, rush past the simulation of festivities! How many who, avoiding the atrium of clients with the return, flee through the dark entrances of the buildings, as if it were more inhumane to deceive than to exclude! How many who break their sleep with the last shameful lusts and heavy sorrows, when their sleep is broken, they wait for a foreign expectation, with barely raised lips, whispering the most arrogant name with the most exquisite oscillation!
5. Let us say, those who are truly occupied with duties, who want Zeno, who want Pythagoras daily, and Democritus and other antistites of the good arts, who want Aristotle and Theophrastus to have them as the most familiar, no one of them will be idle, no one will reject the coming to him, happier, more loving of himself, no one will allow anyone to leave him without hands vacant; at night they can convene, during the day they can be free from all mortal men.

recensere

1 No one thinks of your death, all will teach you; no one will break your years, they will contribute theirs to you; no danger in their speech, no capital friendship, no costly observation of them. You will get from them whatever you wish; through them you will not stand, unless you have acquired as much as you most desire [22]. 2 This is the happiness that remains from such beautiful old age, who has submitted himself to their clientele! He will have, with whom he deliberates about the smallest and greatest matters, whom he consults daily about himself, from whom he will hear the truth without offense, praise without flattery, to whom he will mold himself to their likeness. 3 We used to say that the parents, when we were born, were given to certain men; but we are allowed to give birth to ourselves to our own discretion. They are of the most noble minds; choose in which you wish to learn; not only by name will you be adopted, but by the very good things which will not be kept sordidly or maliciously; the greater things will be, as you divide them among many. 4 They will give you a road to eternity and you to that place, from which no one drives out, they will raise you up. This is the one reason for extending mortality, indeed turning it into immortality. Honors, monuments, whatever ambition has ordered or built with works, are quickly destroyed; nothing is not destroyed by the long age and its movement. But those who have consecrated wisdom cannot harm; age will not be abolished, nothing diminished; following and then always something further will be offered to veneration, because it is in the near one, envy is found; we are more amazed at it, as it is further placed. 5 Therefore, much life remains for the wise man, not the same one who closes the fate of others. Only the human race is solved by laws; all serve him for ages like a god. Does time pass a little? This is remembered by it. Does it stand firm? It uses it. Is it coming? It commands it. It makes a long life for all times in one.

XVI.
recensere
1 Their briefest and most anxious age is this, who forget the past, do not heed the present, fear the future; they have come to their end, slowly understand misery, so long as they are occupied, while doing nothing. 2 And it is not that which you may consider a long life for them, because sometimes they invoke death. It vexes them through imprudence, being caught in uncertain affections and things that they fear, they often desire death because they fear. 3 That argument too is not that which you may consider long-lived, because often their day seems long to them, when they complain of slow hours coming when the time for dinner is announced; for if they ever abandon their occupation, they are refreshed in leisure, and do not know how to arrange or extract themselves. Therefore, they tend to some occupation, and every moment is grave to them; even Hercules, when the day of his gladiator’s duty was decreed, or when he waits for the spectacle or pleasure of another, wishes to pass through the middle days. All their hoped-for things are a long delay. 4 But that time, which they love, is short and abrupt, and becomes much shorter than it is; for from elsewhere they flee and cannot stand in one desire. They have not long days, but unseen; but on the contrary, the nights that seem small, which they demand in the company of courtesans or wine! 5 Hence also, the frenzy of poets, who with tales human errors, which has been seen Jupiter, to lengthen the night with pleasure. What else is it to burn our vices than to inscribe gods and give an excused license to divinity’s illness as an example? Can these not seem the shortest nights, which they so rightly deserve? They lose the day of the night in expectation, the night in the fear of light.

to review

1 Ipsae voluptates eorum trepidae et variis terroribus inquietae sunt subitque cum maxime exsultantis sollicita cogitatio: " Haec quam diu? " Ab hoc affectu reges suam flevere potentiam, nec illos magnitudo fortunae suae delectavit, sed venturus aliquando finis exterruit. Cum per magna camporum spatia porrigeret exercitum nec numerum eius sed mensuram conprenderet Persarum rex insolentissimus, lacrimas profudit, quod intra centum annos nemo ex tanta iuventute superfuturus esset. 2 At illis admoturus erat fatum ipse qui flebat perditurusque alios in mari, alios in terra, alios proelio, alios fuga et intra exiguum tempus consumpturus illos, quibus centesimum annum timebat. 3 Quid, quod gaudia quoque eorum trepida sunt? Non enim solidis causis innituntur, sed eadem qua oriuntur vanitate turbantur. Qualia autem putas esse tempora etiam ipsorum confessione misera, eum haec quoque, quibus se attollunt et super hominem efferunt, parum sincera sint? 4 Maxima quaeque bona sollicita sunt nec ulli fortunae minus bene quam optimae creditur; alia felicitate ad tuendam felicitatem opus est et pro ipsis quae successere vota facienda sunt. Omne enim quod fortuito obvenit instabile est, quoque altius surrexerit, opportunius est in occasum. Neminem porro casura delectant; miserrimam ergo necesse est, non tantum brevissimam, vitam esse eorum, qui magno parant labore, quod maiore possideant. Operose adsecuntur quae volunt, anxii tenent quae adsecuti sunt; 5 nulla interim numquam redituri temporis ratio est. Novae occupationes veteribus substituuntur, spes spem excitat, ambitionem ambitio. Miseriarum non finis quaeritur, sed materia mutatur. Nostri nos honores torserunt? Plus temporis alieni auferunt. Candidati laborare desimus? Suffragatores incipimus. Accusandi deposimus molestiam? Iudicandi nanciscimur. Iudex desit esse? Quaesitor est. Alienorum bonorum mercennaria procuratione consenuit? Suis opibus distinetur. 6 Marium caliga dimisit? Consulatus exercet. Quintius dictaturam properat pervadere? Ab aratro revocabitur. Ibit[26] in Poenos nondum tantae maturus rei Scipio; victor Hannibalis, victor Antiochi, sui consulatus decus, fraterni sponsor, ni per ipsum mora esset, eum Iove reponeretur; civiles servatorem agitabunt seditiones et post fastiditos a iuvene diis aequos honores iam senem contumacis exili delectabit ambitio. Numquam derunt vel felices vel miserae sollicitudinis causae; per occupationes vita trudetur. Otium numquam agetur, semper optabitur.

XVIII.
revise

1 Excerpe itaque te volgo, Pauline carissime, et in tranquilliorem portum non pro aetatis spatio iactatus tandem recede. Cogita, quot fluctus subieris, quot tempestates partim privatas sustinueris, partim publicas in te converteris; satis iam per laboriosa et inquieta documenta exhibita virtus est: experire, quid in otio faciat. Maior pars aetatis, certe melior rei publicae data sit; aliquid temporis tui sume etiam tibi. 
2 Nec te ad segnem aut inertem quietem voco, non ut somno et caris turbae voluptatibus quidquid est in te indolis vividae mergas. Non est istud adquiescere; invenies maiora omnibus adhuc strenue tractatis operibus, quae repositus et securus agites. 
3 Tu quidem orbis terrarum rationes administras tam abstinenter quam alienas, tam diligenter quam tuas, tam religiose quam publicas. In officio amorem consequeris, in quo odium vitare difficile est; sed tamen, mihi crede, satius est vitae suae rationem quam frumenti publici nosse. 
4 Istum animi vigorem rerum maximarum capacissimum a ministerio honorifico quidem sed parum ad beatam vitam apto revoca et cogita non id egisse te ab aetate prima omni cultu studiorum liberalium, ut tibi multa milia frumenti bene committerentur; maius quiddam et altius de te promiseras. Non derunt et frugalitatis exactae homines et laboriosae operae; tanto aptiora portandis oneribus tarda iumenta sunt quam nobiles equi, quorum generosam pernicitatem quis umquam gravi sarcina pressit? 
5 Cogita praeterea, quantum sollicitudinis sit ad tantam te molem obicere; cum ventre tibi humano negotium est. Nec rationem patitur nec aequitate mitigatur nec ulla prece flectitur populus esuriens. Modo modo intra paucos illos dies, quibus C. Caesar perit, si quis inferis sensus est, hoc gravissime ferens, quod sciebat populo Romano superstiti[27] septem aut octo certe dierum cibaria superesse, dum ille pontes navibus iungit et viribus imperi ludit, aderat ultimum malorum obsessis quoque, alimentorum egestas; exitio paene ac fame constitit et, quae famem sequitur, rerum omnium ruina furiosi et externi et infeliciter superbi regis imitatio. 
6 Quem tunc animum habuerunt illi, quibus erat mandata frumenti publici cura, saxa, ferrum, ignes. Gaium excepturi? Summa dissimulatione tantum inter viscera latentis mali tegebant, eum ratione scilicet. Quaedam enim ignorantibus aegris curanda sunt; causa multis moriendi fuit morbum suum nosse.

XIX.
Review
1 Take yourself to these more tranquil, safer, greater things! You think you are like what, whether to cure, so that it remains uncorrupted and comes from fraud and neglect, that grain is poured into cellars, so that it is not affected by moisture and does not crack, so that it responds to the measure and weight, or whether you know how to approach these sacred and sublime things, what matter is of God, what pleasure, what condition, what form; who expects your soul’s fortunes; where nature composes us from bodies; what is that which sustains and supports all the heaviest things in this world, suspends the light, carries to the highest fire, excites the stars with their movements; other things beyond that are full of great miracles? 2 Look with your mind left alone to these things! Now, while the blood is hot, it is necessary to go towards the better things. It awaits you in this kind of life, much of good arts, love of virtue and use, oblivion of desires, knowledge of living and dying, high rest of things. 3 Indeed, the condition of all occupations is miserable, yet their most miserable condition is those who do not labor with their own work, they sleep in another’s sleep, they walk in another’s step, to love and hate all the most free things, they are commanded. If these want to know how short their life is, they should think about what part of it is theirs.

XX.
recensere

1. Cum videris itaque praetextam saepe iam sumptam, cum celebre in foro nomen, ne invideris; ista vitae damno parantur. Ut unus ab illis numeretur annus, omnis annos suos conterent. Quosdam antequam in summum ambitionis eniterentur, inter prima luctantis aetas reliquit; quosdam eum in consummationem dignitatis per mille indignitates erepsissent, misera subit cogitatio laborasse ipsos in titulum sepulcri; quorundam ultima senectus, dum in novas spes ut iuventa disponitur, inter conatus magnos et improbos invalida defecit. 2. Foedus ille, quem in iudicio pro ignotissimis litigatoribus grandem natu et imperitae coronae assensiones captantem, spiritus liquit; turpis ille, qui vivendo lassus citius quam laborando inter ipsa officia conlapsus est; turpis, quem accipiendis immorientem rationibus diu tractus risit heres. 3. Praeterire quod mihi occurrit exemplum non possum. S. Turannius[29] fuit exactae diligentiae senex, qui post annum nonagesimum, cum vacationem procurationis ab C. Caesare ultro accepisset, componi se in lecto et velut exanimem a circumstante familia plangi iussit. Lugebat domus otium domini senis nec finivit ante tristitiam, quam labor illi suus restitutus est. Adeone iuvat occupatum mori? 4. Idem plerisque animus est; diutius cupiditas illis laboris quam facultas est; eum imbecillitate corporis pugnant, senectutem ipsam nullo alio nomine gravem iudicant, quam quod illos seponit. Lex a quinquagesimo anno militem non legit, a sexagesimo senatorem non citat; difficilius homines a se otium impetrant quam a lege. 5. Interim dum rapiuntur et rapiunt, dum alter alterius quietem rumpit, dum mutuo miseri sunt, vita est sine fructu, sine voluptate, sine ullo profectu animi. Nemo in conspicuo mortem habet, nemo non procul spes intendit; quidam vero disponunt etiam illa, quae ultra vitam sunt, magnas moles sepulcrorum et operum publicorum dedicationes et ad rogum munera et ambitiosas exequias. At me hercules istorum funera, tamquam minimum vixerint, ad faces et cereos ducenda sunt.

imprudens inferior MSS.: impudens A.
at supplied by Pauly.
querella Madvig: qua A: cura Haase.
eloquentia et (?) cotidiana apparently A1.
sollicitatio Bourgery: spatio A: occupatio Gertz.
alicui A5: aliquo A1: aliquoi Gertz, Hermes.
pacat inferior MSS.: placat A.
Paullusque Ruben: plusque A: Iullusque Bourgery after Waltz.
in amicitia sed in apparatu A: in amicitiam sed in apparatum inferior MSS.: in amicitia Hermes.
ultimum Gertz after Bentley, Hermes: vitam A, Bourgery.
ande traant A2: unde detrahant Madvig, Hermes.
stultius esse quam quorundam supplied by Bourgery: alii alia.
ore instinctus A: ore instinctu Hermes: furore instinctus Muretus: ore et instinctu Gertz: horrore instinctus Bourgery.
cunctationem Hermes after Gertz: cognationem A: cogitationem some inferior MSS., Bourgery, Duff.
quoi Gruter: quo A.
aut added by Madvig.
novissimos A: novis cibis Madvig, Duff: novissimo more Gertz.
suam Muretus transfers from a place after publicam.
usque Gertz: et usque A.
Text uncertain: others read innoxis.
farta A: paria Haase.
quantum plurimum cupieris Muretus: plurimum quantum ceperis A: cum coeperis Hermes after Vahlen.
in commonly added.
amant Muretus: amanti A.
fit added by Erasmus before suo.
ibit A: ivit Haase: ibat Duff.
The text is very dubious: quod sciebat populo Romano superstiti Hermes: quod dicebat populo Romano super stite A: quod populo Romano superstite, dicebant Madvig.
vigentibus A: sensibus added by Buff after Madvig.
S. Turannius Gertz: styrannius A.